[Music]
welcome to topcast and
part two of my introduction to papa
which is an occasional
five to ten minute bite size personal
summary of aspects of the philosophy of
karl popper that
i find valuable my first piece of poppa
today
begins here with number one
karl popper follows in a long lineage of
analytic philosophy stretching back to
ancient greece
the idea that knowledge is conjectural
which is the same knowledge of guest
stretches back perhaps to xenophonies
who lived around 570 to 478 bc
this ancient philosopher seems to have
been one of the first to drive a wedge
between
true belief and knowledge xenophobia
seems to have understood that reality
exists
and we can come to know it but this does
not mean we have a final answer
papa quotes a part of xenophonies and
his great work conjectures and
refutations
where he says but as for certain truth
no man has known it
nor shall he know it neither of the gods
nor yet of all the things of which i
speak for even if by chance he were to
utter the final truth
he would himself not know it for all is
but
a woven web of guesses popper takes this
idea of knowledge
being a woven web of guesses very
seriously it is not that all knowledge
is a guess
unconnected to reality the opposite
guesses are anchored to reality by
encounters with it
observations these observations enable
us to rule out certain guesses
hence the two arms of poppa's
epistemology
conjectures the guesses the claims about
what is true
and the refutations the criticisms those
observations that
show some of those claims cannot be
correct now perhaps one of the most
jarring and surprising aspects of
papyrian epistemology is this
knowledge is guest it really is
all knowledge is a guess now to some
people this seems immediately wrong
scientists are not merely guessing it's
not all guesswork
you may be thinking that right now and
that is right
it is not all and only guesswork because
this would mean
fiction which is completely made up it's
just like non-fiction
which is not but the genesis of any idea
is guesswork now if you don't like the
word guess
fine call it a conjecture or if you're
trained in the sciences or some other
similar field let's say
a creative hypothesis but if you've been
to school
have you been to school okay we are
actually taught if not explicitly then
at least by implicit suggestion
that your knowledge is acquired by
reading listening absorbing the lesson
you aren't guessing you're being told
and then you learn
but that whole picture it's not entirely
false but it is misleading
when you listen when you're told you're
guessing what is meant and sometimes you
are wrong often indeed
and when you read you guess the meaning
my own series of podcasts here is
testimony to this very epistemology
i've read karl popper's and david
deutsch's work and now i'm telling you
some of my interpretations of their work
and others who have already read those
books and listened to find out those
ideas about
whether poppers and deutsche's ideas are
like mine and it's no accident school
and universities form study groups
together they are each comparing their
ideas about what they read or have heard
with each other
each has a slightly different
interpretation but as they get closer to
the truth
they tend to converge and they all begin
to agree and then they say they've
learned the lesson that they need to
pauper's epistemology is called critical
rationalism but it might as well be
called
creative rationalism because the
creative part is where
knowledge begins once created then it's
criticized and if it survives this
process
we are apt to say i know it because then
you've no better idea two common sense
popper is a common sense philosopher
perhaps better we might say is a
philosopher of common sense
papa writes in objective knowledge that
all science and all philosophy are
enlightened common sense now this stands
in contrast to so many other
philosophers and philosophies
that give the subject a bad name common
sense entails realism
that thing you see yes it exists that's
just common sense
can common sense fail of course anything
can fail
this is where the enlightened bit comes
in you think you see the sky
well you don't there is no sky it's an
illusion you think the rainbow ends
there
well try to follow it it too is equal
parts trick of the eye
and external reality but unlike with
idealism
which says taken seriously everything is
in your mind
or it's even more extreme form solipsism
only your mind exists
realism simply says that what we tend to
think is correct is a good rule of thumb
and we need to have good observations
criticisms of reality
before we give up on that common sense
common sense as papa says it can be
thought of as a vague starting point
and with science and careful criticism
we refine these starting points into
grand predictive explanatory theories
but this means i really should say more
about three
realism this is simply the rather
prosaic claim that the world exists it's
out there beyond your own mind
and it can be known it acts
independently of what you think about it
for the most part
popper actually quotes churchill in a
certain passage in his essay
called two faces of common sense
actually says of churchill and i quote
winston churchill is still quite unknown
as an epistemologist
his name does not appear in any of the
many anthologies on epistemology
and it is also missing even from the
encyclopedia of philosophy now why
should karl popper
possibly the greatest epistemologer and
philosopher of the last two centuries
say this of a politician what had
churchill said that had so impressed
papa well let's just
read it churchill wrote i always rested
upon the following argument which i
devised for myself many years ago
here is this great son standing
apparently are no better
foundation than our physical senses but
happily there is a method
apart all together from our physical
senses of testing the reality of the sun
astronomers predict by mathematics and
pure reason that a black spot will pass
across the sun on a certain day
you look and your senses side
immediately tells you that their
calculations have indicated we have
taken what is called in military map
making a cross bearing
we have got independent testimony to the
reality of the sun
when my metaphysical friends tell me
that the data on which the astronomers
made their calculations were necessarily
obtained originally through the evidence
of their senses
i say no they might in theory at any
rate
be obtained by automatic calculating
machines set in motion by the light
falling upon them
without admixture of the human senses at
any stage
i reaffirm with emphasis that the sun is
real and also
that it is hot in fact as hot as hell
and that if the metaphysicians doubt it
they should go there and see end quote
from churchill
popper goes on to say i may perhaps add
that i regard churchill's argument
especially important passages which i
have put in italics
not only as a valid criticism of the
idealistic and subjectivist arguments
but as the philosophically soundest and
most ingenious argument against
subjective epistemology
that i know i am not aware of any
philosopher who has not ignored this
argument
apart from some of my students whose
attention i have drawn to it the
argument is highly original
first published in 1930 it is one of the
earliest philosophical arguments
making use of the possibility of
automatic observatories and calculating
machines
programmed by newtonian theory and yet
40 years after its publication
winston churchill is still quite unknown
as an epistemologist
so that's a rather remarkable
recommendation of churchill
from papa the bucket and the searchlight
all this
is tied together with the distinction
between
two metaphorical epistemologies is the
procurement of knowledge achieved by
pouring it like a fluid from one mind to
the next
which is a passive process or is it
rather more akin to a searchlight
actively trying to find something that
works the bucket theory of mind is still
very much of the impetus behind almost
all schools almost all of the time
teachers and educationalists make noises
about rejecting the bucket theory
but the truth is that the methodology of
schooling is the delivery of lessons it
is not about children finding a problem
and falling in love with it as popper
has called us to do
school is almost always and will forever
remain if it does not change utterly
a place where the bucket theory is in
action
the searchlight concept is where a
problem is located by the searchlight
and with ever more light brought into
focus and with greater attention
interest and curiosity
more is revealed until the searchlight
should move on
the searchlight is an active process of
problem finding and problem solving the
bucket
is a passive receptacle people our minds
are searchlights not buckets
number five debating definitions if you
have ever been in a philosophical
discussion where disagreement has arisen
it can be easy to observe that the way
in which the discussion
gets sidelined more quickly than
anything else is by falling into a
dispute about what a particular
word means a philosopher like sam harris
might make a claim like
morality is about the well-being of
conscious creatures
there's much to unpack there and much
that i might disagree with but one
way in which to ensure in a discussion
with sam goes off the rails almost
immediately
is to demand he define with great
precision
what he means by well-being the reason
someone makes this move in any debate
is because they know that no matter what
the response is that sam gives
it will contain a term where the
interlocutor can say well what does that
mean
and so on at infinitum ultimately
we must accept that all definitions are
circular
but this does not make claims using
words like sam's there
vacuous they are not popper understood
this there is a difference between
a philosophical argument and just a
prosaic debate if you have ever watched
a competitive debate like a high school
debate or a university to debate
the affirmative team will often begin by
defining their terms
indeed in many places they are expected
to and then it is up to the negative
team
to dispute that definition or in rare
cases accept it whatever the case
such a debate is no discussion it does
not allow for a proper philosophical
argument
why papa writes in his essay a realist
view of logic physics and history that
one should never get involved in verbal
questions of meaning and never get
interested in words
and he continues if challenged by the
question of whether
a word one uses really means this or
perhaps that
then one should say i don't know and i
am not interested in meanings
and if you wish i would gladly accept
your terminology
this never does any harm one should
never quarrel about words
and never get involved in questions of
terminology one should always keep away
from discussing concepts what we are
really interested in
our real problems our factual problems
or in other words
problems of theories and their truth we
are interested in theories and how they
stand up to critical
discussion and our critical discussion
is controlled by our interest
in truth so popper's idea is a departure
from most other philosophers
and recall most other modern
philosophers today
philosophers post 19th century those who
tend in the direction of wittgenstein
are schooled in a linguistic tradition
they think you really have to get to the
nub of what people mean
the question but what do you mean by
that is almost an attack of sorts
it seeks to require one to justify their
choice of words
and especially in the case where any
answer to that question is followed by a
repetitive
but what do you mean by that we are in a
loop spiraling down into a hole of
irrelevance
what philosophy like science is actually
trying to do is to solve a problem
the search for solutions things that
truly do
work